---
Aliases: 
banner: ""
banner_y: 0.744
banner _x: 0.5
---
### Index
- Previous chapter -->
- Next Chapter[^1] -->
- Sources -
	- 
- 
# Etymology And background

## Montevideo units
- [Montevideo units](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montevideo_units) are a method of measuring uterine performance during labor. They were created in 1949 by two physicians, [Roberto Caldeyro-Barcia](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Roberto_Caldeyro-Barcia "Roberto Caldeyro-Barcia") and [Hermogenes Alvarez](https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Hermogenes_Alvarez&action=edit&redlink=1 "Hermogenes Alvarez (page does not exist)"), from [Montevideo](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Montevideo "Montevideo"), [Uruguay](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Uruguay "Uruguay"). 
- They are exactly equal to 1mmHg within 10 minutes. A standard adequate measurement is 200; this is generally equivalent to 27 kPa of combined pressure change within 10 minutes.
- Units are directly equal to pressure change in mmHg summed over a ten-minute window. It is calculated by internally (not externally) measuring peak uterine pressure amplitude (in mmHg), subtracting the resting tone of the contraction, and adding up the numbers in a 10-minute period. Uterine pressure is generally measured through an intrauterine pressure catheter.
- Montevideo units can be more simply calculated by summing the individual contraction intensities in a ten-minute period, a process which should arrive at a result identical to the original method of calculation.
- Generally, ==above 200 MVUs is considered necessary== for adequate labor during the active phase.

### Example
If, for instance:
-   Peak uterine pressure amplitudes were 50 mmHg
-   during the 10 minute period of measurement 3 contractions occurred
-   subtract the resting tone from the peak intensity of the contraction
-   add the 3 contractions together to get the MVUs
-   Montevideo units are calculated by obtaining the peak uterine pressure amplitude and subtracting the resting tone. Then adding up those numbers generated by each contraction within a 10-minute window.
-   For example, five contractions occurred, producing peak pressures of 55, 50, 45, 65, and 50 mm Hg, respectively. The resting tone of the contractions is 10.
	55-10 = 45 50-10 = 40 45-10 = 35 65-10 = 55 50-10 = 40
	45+40+35+55+40 = 215 MVUs
- 





#
[^1]: Next Chapter is 