---
aliases: 
banner: ""
banner_y: 0.744
banner _x: 0.5
---
### Index
- Prerequisites ⇾
- Next[^1] →
- Sources ->
- Topics -> 
	- Liver disorders of 🤰 
		- [[Hepatitis]] 
		- [[AFLP]]
		- [[IHCP]]
		- HELLP syndrome
		- [[Subcapsular Hematoma]]
		- [[Nausea and Vomiting of pregnancy|Hyperemesis Gravidarum]]
		- Chronic liver disease
		- Post liver transplant pregnancy & outcome
---
# Gastrointestinal System


# Liver
### History of liver
- liver almost till 17th century was thought to be the organ of emotions. affections and people thought that was the source of life. Greek physician gallon gave this central role to this organ, probably looking at its size. 
- Beyond 17th century, William Harvey discovered the circulation and then liver came to the second position. It was dethroned from its position of the center of all the activities. 
- Bartholin declared that liver produces bile not blood
- John Brown gave a detailed description about the cirrhotic liver 


## Liver & Pregnancy
- it is the metabolic factory in the body But compared to the other organs in the body, which undergo various changes during pregnancy, liver probably undergoes very minimal changes in pregnancy 
- What exactly is the physiological changes that you can observe in a pregnant woman in the hepatobiliary system? Interpretation of liver function test results. Whenever you have a sheet with liver function test results, how should you interpret? Where should you get alarm jaundice? The most. important symptom of a liver disease and how to come to a conclusion depending on the type of jaundice
- **Abnormal liver function tests** occur in about 3 to 5% of the pregnancies. This could be due to 1 of 3 reasons
	1. group of diseases which just *coincide* with pregnancy. So it is not unique to pregnancy. It can occur with anybody, but it could be coincidental here also in a pregnant woman. -> Hepatitis, Cholelithiasis 
	2. The second thing is the woman becomes pregnant who already has been diagnosed with some hepatic disorders. -> *Underlying chronic liver disease* i.e cirrhosis, chronic hepatitis
	3. 3rd group, which is *unique* to pregnancy - AFLP, Hyperemesis, Preeclampsia with HELLP, IHCP
		- this comes under the purview of the management by an obstetrician. So one should be really thorough with the symptomatology, the differential diagnosis and the management options. 
		- Of course, even the intra natal and the neonatal care in these cases. 
- Any woman who is pregnant if she is admitted with liver disorders, we really keep with our fingers crossed. We don't know what it would be and Everyone would be worried about it. 
	- Many chronic hepatic disorders, most often, keeps the woman infertile. They conceive with lot of difficulty. And in case they conceive these conditions, may really sometimes deteriorate or really cause problems. 
	- And the coincidental ones, especially the infections, may create a very challenging situation. We know. infections in pregnancy of the liver, like Hepatitis, is neither related to pregnancy, nor relieved by pregnancy. So we really have no option here than observing the patient, recovering on her own. 
	- The 3rd group of patients, The disorders unique to pregnancy, some of them which probably improve and show some kind of good hopes after we deliver out the person, or see that the pregnancy is terminated. So there is also a saying, pregnancy woman, a pregnant woman with hepatic disorder, is already one foot in the grave. So what should the obstetrician do? You should see that other foot doesn't slip into the grave and you have to bury her. 
- Incidents of association of liver disorders in pregnancy could be around one in 1000 pregnancies in india 
- What are the normal findings in 🤰? 
	- The liver is usually impalpable in pregnancy. Palmer erythema and spider Nevi. These two things could be found in pregnant women even without liver disorder. So it could be a physiological occurrence. 
	- ==↑==You know, placenta produces so much of alkaline phosphatase that the alkaline phosphatase in the serum could be on the higher side compared to a non pregnant woman.
	- ==↓==but the bilirubin, albumin, to some extent even the serum total proteins, urea and uric acid are slightly lower in pregnant women, probably due to hemodilution
	- ==<->==Serum transaminases both AST and ALT and gamma glutamyl transpeptidase and also fasting bile acids do not show any change 
	- ==↓==we always hear that blood supply to most of the organs increased during pregnancy. So contrary to that liver which constitutes about 35% takes the share from the cardiac output normally --> in pregnancy, it falls down to almost 28%. So there is a slight decrease in the liver blood flow during pregnancy 
- normal liver function test interpretations. 

| LFT                         | Prepregnancy    | Pregnancy       |
| --------------------------- | --------------- | --------------- |
| S. Bilirubin (mg/dl)        | 0 - 0.19        | 0 - 0.16        |
| Total protein/albumin (g/l) | 6.4-8.6/3.5-4.6 | 4.8-6.4/2.8-3.7 |
| AST (IU/L)                  | 7-40            | 10-30           |
| ALT (IU/L)                  | 0-40            | 3-43            |
| ALP (IU/L)                  | 30-130          | 32 -450         |
| S. Bile acid (mg/dl)        | <0.16           | <0.16           |

^423fa0

- Alanine aminotransferase (ALT) is more specific than aspartate aminotransferase (AST) for liver damage because ALT is found primarily in the liver and has a longer half-life.
	- Aspartate aminotransferase (AST) is more sensitive than alanine aminotransferase (ALT) because it is more abundant in the liver. However, ALT is more specific because it is only found in the liver. AST is found in many other organs, including the brain, heart, and skeletal muscle.
		- Both ALT and AST are sensitive markers of liver damage. However, AST is more sensitive because it is approximately two or three times more abundant in the liver than ALT.
	- AST is an enzyme that helps metabolize amino acids. ALT is an enzyme that converts proteins into energy for liver cells.
- Just look the bilirubin slight fall. Total protein and serum albumin there is a slight fall. 
- Not much of change with ASD and ALT. They are almost very similar to the non pregnant range. 
- Alkaline phosphatase almost 3 to four times increase. So while interpreting the results never just jump to a conclusion that alkaline phosphatase is increased. So there must be some kind of obstructive jaundice or so. No students. The alkaline phosphatase level, the upper limit of 450 to 500 international units per liter could be taken as the normal upper limit of alkaline phosphatase by lacets do not show any change 
- Serum bile acid very well because this is the one which is going to cause all the trouble in IHCP. 

Pregnancy with liver disorders

| *unique* to pregnancy | *association* with pregnancy |
| ------------------- | -------------------------- |
| AFLP, IHCP, hypertensive disorders of the pregnancy with HELLP syndrome, hyperemesis gravidarum, antepartum intrapartum or postpartum sepsis as a part of multi organ failure can also present a hepatic failure, liver hematoma and rupture | viral hepatitis, Cirrhosis, chronic active hepatitis, Fulminant hepatitis, hemolytic anemias And any kind of obstruction to the bile flow, gallbladder stones, head of the pancreas cancer, Drug induced, autoimmune disease, Wilson's disease, hemochromatosis |

### Evaluation of any Liver disorders in 🤰 
- Structural evaluation, usually the best mode of investigation would be doing in ultrasound scan, right? And if at all you're suspecting portal hypertension, which is a featuring chronic hepatitis, and also whenever the woman has entered into a stage of seahorses, then the Doppler of portal veins would come to your rescue. Then see. Connecticut scan of the liver is very useful in cases of hemochromatosis, right? When you want to check the deposition of ferritin in the lever, especially in cases of Talecinias and anemias, ct scan will be of some help. Very similarly, mri also could help you for this. Then endoscopic retrograde, colangio pancreatography could be both diagnostic and therapeutic, mainly for the gallstones. So this is. one investigation which could be therapeutic and can be done safely during pregnancy, right? Lever bioxy. Yes, lever bioxy could be diagnostic in many conditions, but not routinely done in most of the cases of pregnancy. Its most often clinical and biochemical diagnosis, pathological diagnosis is not that frequently practiced. A good ultrasound is. more than enough. A good ultrasound use maximum information and whenever the results are equivocal then you can go for MRI CT that is about the structural evaluation. How do you find the function and depending on the report, how would you say that this particular condition could be because of this? So basically we go for bilirubin. Bilirubin, if it is increased, it just says that is jaundice and look at the severity. Then you have to go for the sub classification of the pillar of in whether it is direct below rubin or ind And you may have to conclude whether it is pre hepatic jaundice, hepatic jaundice or post hepatic jaundice. So whenever you have unconjugated it is more of hemolysis and the Gilberts. This is could be very rare in pregnancy. This is a general table in which some of the aspects may not be straight away applicable to a pregnant woman. Alkaline phosphatase usually diagnosis cholesterol. It also picks up hepatic metastasis. ASD and alt usually most delivery disorders Like viral infections, IHCPA, FLP, everywhere. You notice that these things are increased. Ast alt, but the degree to which they are increased. Enormous increase 100 times. 200 times increase. You find in hepatitis, whereas about 10 times 15 times you find it. Ihcp and af lp. Very important differential diagnostic point to differentiate an acute fatty liver of pregnancy from viral hepatitis. Gamma rhythm is transpeptidase is more often a marker for alcohol abuse. Albumin tells about the severity because the protein which is produced by the lever when it is affected, it tells that it is a very severe affection of the lever. Proton been time, which is assessed after giving vitamin K. It also assesses the severity. procollagen and type three peptide will assess the fibrosis. So if at all you have a suspicion of zeros, it may be biliary zerosis, which can occur in younger women, or even alcoholic syrosis. Nowadays are not that far that you start binding lot of women with alcoholic seer horses in the reproductive age group itself. So the fibrosis, the extent fibrosis is given by your pro collagen and type the peptide. So coming to the exact evaluation of jaundice, whenever a jaundice woman comes and you have the unconjugated versus conjugated picture, also Having some picture about the presents or absence of eurobillinogen in the urine or stools. 
- 
- 
- So with this picture can be say whether it is a pre hepatic hepatic or post hepatic. Yes, it is exactly possible in this table. I have tried to explain what is the mechanism of formation these pigments and why they are conjugated or unconjugated and listed some of the conditions in which you find these. So first. of all hemoglobin is usually the raw material for the formation is bilubin. So it is bound to aluminum. and unconjugated bilirubin is the one that is that you find in prehypatic jaundice, unconjugated bilirubin is found and unconjugated bilirubin is never found in urine nurse tools. So no changes you observe in urine nurse tools, you find a very deep jaundice in the woman, right? But you will not find any change in the urine or stools. And this. clearly says it is most often hemolytic jaundice. Sometimes it can occur with severe sepsis also and even in help syndrome or preeclampsia. If you find mild jaundice, you do not find serious joints in health or preeclampsia. It is a mild jaundice and this is also unconjugated virus students. Whenever you have unconjugated bilirubin, it is not found in urine or stores. This is one thing I want you to remember coming to the hepatic jump. right bilirubin. What is circulating in the blood is sucked in or extracted by the lever cells. And it gets conjugated in the liver. And after conjugation, it becomes a soluble in water, and it is secretary. So because of the insoluble nature of unconjugated, it cannot come in urine or stools. But here it gets secreted in the by. And once the bile goes into the. intestine, it can get secreted both in stools. It can get absorbed, which is called entero hepatitis circulation. Part of it can get excreted to the urine. So in hepatic jaundice, you find the eurobillinogen and stirkobelinogen in urine and stools. So it is a conjugated bilirubin, and it is found in urine. and stools. And the problems that you can see which can be associated is the conjugation problems like congenital diseases, syrosis and hepatitis. Hepatitis is a very important causeway for conjugated hyper bilirubinemia. But students, there is no obstructive factor outside. OK, so. But there is increased recreation of pi and that is getting converted to eurobillinogen and stircopilinogen. Hence you will have very dark stools and also very In addition to the jaundice that is present, the 3rd situation is post hepatic jaundice here. The physiology is normally the bile that is secreted should go through the canaliculi in the lever. Then it should come to the duct. Then it passes through the head of the pancreas most often, then through the ampura waiter, it enters the intestines. So again, as we see here, it is all these things happen at the conjugation. And once it enters the intestine from there, the enter hepatic circulation and also secretion into the urine occurs. So the urine would be high color, and also stool is colored. But just imagine if there is an obstruction to the flow. Obstruction to the flow of the pipe, then nothing. enters into the intestine. And when nothing enters into the intestine, this tool becomes **** short tail. It loses its color, which is because of this bilirubin or eurobillinogen and subcobilinogen. Urine also, you do not find eurobilly nogen. OK, so why this obstruction? So it is conjugated. Miller Rubin. But you have more and more of Belarubin in the serum and accumulation getting in the canalicular system or in the pile duct system and not able to enter into the intestines. So very high alkaline phosphatase is associated here. And degree of obstruction is the one which determines whether the stools will become totally pale, and whether eurobilliness is totally disappears from the urine So if the obstruction is partial, if the obstruction is not totally complete everywhere, then some part of it would be entering, and you may not see all these symptoms. Otherwise, if it is a complete obstruction, you see pale white dish tools and also no eurobidden origin in the urine. So you can get it sometimes with estrogen, especially the cholistasis, any kind of cholistasis, then. duct problems, duct problems could be colangitis. It could be bleury sylloses. It could be gallstones. It could be carcinoma of the head of the pancreas, causing obstruction, carcinoma at the ampule of weight. All these things can cause obstruction and can cause obstructive jointies. We use the word obstructive jaundice here that is forced hepatic and in these cases the woman will have no. eurobilinogen in the unit or the stool will be pale in color. So depending on unconjugated and conjugated and presents are absence of eurobirinogen, you may be able to differentiate what kind of jaundice I'm dealing with. So what are the symptoms that are related to the liver disorders? An old Miss Muffet decided to rough it and lived upon whiskey and jinx. red hands and a spider developed outside her such are the wages of skin sin. So in a poem, a six liner, beautifully described the cutaneous appearances in case of chronic liver disorders. So whatever is said as red hands and a spider is nothing but Palma and Spider Nevi. Yes, students you can find this kind of thing when the liver is almost on the verge of failure. Otherwise you have a general failure repelled. Failure to thrive, feeling lethargic, aversion to poop, etcetera. Jaundice is one important symptom. Hibernian circulation and. Sinotic spells flushed extremities, bounding pulse, other features, fever and septicemia, most often cytopine mediatics, neurological changes, hypoproteinemia, which can be associated with collection of fluid in the serious cavities, changes in the nitrogen metabolism, causing accumulation of ammonia. Just imagine this is the Center for fact metabolism, protein metabolism and carbohydrate metabolism. So every metabolism is affected. You can get problems. associated with the accumulation of the raw materials or the accumulation of materials which should be detoxified. Whenever is a very important center for detoxification, right, skin and endocrine changes most often attributable to the estrogen being not metabolized properly. So in many you can even see gynecomastia and chloasma, which is secondary. with estrogen dissolved blood coagulation, you know coagulation factors are most often secreted by the lever. So coagulation. Could be associated. Try to relate all these symptoms whenever you are studying each condition and apply there you will get the symptomatology of almost everything in labor disorders. So coming to the general aspects of investigations routinely need to the complete blood count. You do the ASDALT level, you do the LDH level, we look for ammonia level in the blood. Then you can also look for the DIC profile like protrombring time, partial thromboplastic time. You can go for the fibrinogen levels, serum proteins which tells you about the severeity of the condition Ask for an ultrasound scan which can pick up the obstructive aspects to some extent rule out the differential diagnosis of chronic pancreatitis or acute pancreatitis. Like gasses, these are some of the things that you may have to, of course, even renal function tests are very important in these things. So you are working in a center where you have no facilities to manage liver disorder. So when you're referring these cases, you want to refer elsewhere. So how should you refer any liver disorder always comment about whether the urine output is adequate? If so, how much positive bacteriological culture sepsis could be the main cause of the liver failure? Viral zerology, very crucial. Because if you diagnose As a case of viral hepatitis, you need to manage them, preferably in a tertiary center, with a lot of care taken by the healthcare workers also just takes a central Venus pleasure documentation, current medication and fluid regime that was being followed as long as she was under your care scanning and electroencephalogram. If she has already gone into hyper ammonia and the. hepatic encephalopathy stage. So just a small algorithm. How you work out the case of John Dees, you look whether it is conjugated or unconjugated Belarus. If it is conjugated Belarus, it should be either in the hepatic or post hepatic. So for hepatic you look for viral markers most often or look for sea hoses or look for alcoholic. So if it is post hepatic, usually ultrasound MRI or ercp, alkaline phosphatase and canalicular obstruction is very much diagnosable by the level of bile acids. So look at these things. And if it is unconjugated, the hyperbiliubinia that is pre hepatic wherein hemolytic anemia is the most important ones. So you are looking at the LDH, you look for a peripherals near and some specific tests that are done to diagnose emoniti kaninias should be carried. So this is the most simplified algorithm to diagnia. jaundice and this is. Very much applicable to pregnancy too. So with this introduction on the liver disorders, let us go on to the viral hepatitis. Hepatitis. OK, stop. Stop recording. Stop voice recording.




### HELLP
Unique condition in the? river disorders that is health syndrome preeclampsia. You will have probably a detailed discussion about this condition when the hypertensive disorders of pregnancy is discussed, but here it suffices to limit my discussion to the effect of this condition on the lever. About 10% of the patients with three eclampsia can have liver dysfunction. And this is because of the generalized vasoconstriction, which is the pathology in HTTP and hyperperfusion capsule stretching causes shoulder pain. They can have nausea and vomiting also because of the elevation in the ast and alt and ldh will show us, will tell us that there is microvascular hemolysis, right? So there is hemolysis. There is increased ast and alt. There is mild jaundice, right? So this entity, which is the health syndrome with hemolysis, elevated liver enzyme and associated with low blatant count, is one of the situation that can really worsen the hepatic involvement in pree And I clams young mild elevation in Bilirubinisi areas of hemorrhage and infarction could be observed in the liver. There could be sub capsular hemorrhage also, right? Liver biopsy demonstrates sinusoidal, vibrant deposition, peripheral hemorrhages and occasional reverse cell necrosis. Other symptoms of the eclampsia seizures, renal involvement, then. the obstetic problems like abruption, weight term delivery, low platelets could be associated. It can result in significant maternal morbidity and also mortality. 

### Subcapsular hematoma 
Coming to the actual situation of sub capsular hematoma, 1% of the women with help seek. 0 10 developed sub capsular hematoma eclampsia severe preclampsia with DIC could be associated with this condition, even with normal platelet count, hepatitoma carcinoma and trauma drama, adenoma, carcinoma, reclaimsia, eclampsia and help syndrome. These are the causes for subcapsular hematoma of the lever in more than one 3rd of the cases maternal or fetal adverse outcomes are. encountered almost 30% can have adverse outcomes and stationary hematoma. Whenever the hematomas are not increasing, not bothering, usually a conservative approach is warranted in pregnancy and geography may help to localize and also see there is any continued leading into the hematoma and increase in the size of the hematoma. Rapture of the hematoma is a very varied one in almost 50,000 to one in 2,25,000. So very rare event and most. often it occurs in the right loop ruptured hematoma is an indication for emergency intervention should be done in a tertiary center with adequate amount of black and black products with an very experienced surgeon who can manage the giver surgeries. So here probably most often the pregnancy also needs to be terminated simultaneously because of the severeity of the condition and its association with severe preograms. Yeah, hence both of them should be tackled simultaneously and. many a times the hepatic artery pressure pressure on the hepatic vessel which is called Pringles manual can bring down the bleeding to a substantial extent and people believe in just packing, evacuating and packing the area and closing the abdomen. But afterwards you may have to do a real aberotomy to remove the pack, right? And hebatic embolization could be 1 of the other option that is available. Suspicion try to diagnose the condition and act quickly these things. probably will help the mothers to survive this catastrophe, which is very unfortunate in pregnancy

### [[Nausea and Vomiting of pregnancy|Hyperemesis Gravidarum]]
Hypervisors gravitarum 1 in six women can have transient liver dysfunction. It is not a direct affection on the liver. There could be mild elevation of bilirubin, ASDALT when once the orbiting problem is solved, the condition also improves. Both they can have two writers and jaundice, probably severe dehydration, acidosis, starvation, electrolyte imbalance may be responsible for liver dysfunction. Very similar picture you also see in F and B, but students AFLB is most often Later part of pregnancy hypermises is a feature in the early pregnancy. Termination may have to be considered in very rare and resistant cases in severe cases. The renal dysfunction and V-1 deficiency can causeway burning. So even that correction is important. 

### Chronic liver disease 
Coming to chronic liver diseases, very rare to conceive. during chronic liver diseases because of the association of an ovulation and infertility. But sometimes a steroid therapy can improve the fertility and the women can become pregnant. There is no need to terminate pregnancy because of the chronic liver disease, liver functions can deteriorate. But once she delivers, it can improve. Perinatal risk is more than it is managed in. a high risk unit, preferably with a good support from the hepatologist, right after delivery. Also, it can worsen, right? The liver condition might worsen after the delivery of the baby steroids and the immunosuppressant syntax, especially as a diaphragm, can be continued during pregnancy. And one of the greatest risk association here is the ease of a jail varices and the Isis. But esophageal banding is allowed here, and they can proceed with this management. Chronic liver disease. Women have had successful pregnancy outcomes also. 

### Post liver Transplant
Like liver disease, women have had successful pregnancy outcomes also coming to nowadays. Every organ is getting transplanted. So you can have pregnant women. post liver transplant also one year after the transplant, the woman, if she is really keen on getting pregnant, can attempt pregnancy. And if she cul saves, it is treated as a high risk pregnancy. Successful outcomes have been on record in almost 90% of these attempted pregnancies. Immuno separation is continued throughout pregnancy, right? So I. and the level of the immunosuppressant drugs, especially dichrolymus and cyclopsore in should be carefully monitored and also a good monitor on the possibility of graft rejection should be carefully done here. Fetal effects like B term delivery, fetal growth restriction or more in these women. So a fetal growth monitoring should be more frequently done. Lever transplantation women can deliver measuring. There is no uh. contraindications for vaginal delivery. It is very rarely mother may deteriorate during pregnancy and may require a retransplantation. So this is one study which shows that the abortion rate is slightly increased almost 5 to 16% gestational diabetes incidence is slightly increased. Then preterm delivery risk is almost 40 to 45% in the. the SGI lads or even FGR babies are to the tune of 16 to 21% and neonatal complications would be about 25%. 11% graft rejection and need for a subsequent transfusion is there. But live birth rate C students is almost 80 to 90% very remarkable 

### misc
So some miscellaneous situations overall hypertension may get exacerbated during pregnancy. 1/3 of the women with total hypertension develop ease of age of varices. 3 fourth of the pregnant women with preexisting varices can present with hematomesis. So 75% women comes with amateurs and they need to be managed very energetically. Endoscopic variational chloro therapy or banding is not contraindicated in pregnancy. You can go ahead but CRI syndrome autoimmune hepatitis require individualized management probably with Patient of a hepatologist, gallstones, obstructive joints, if you have any of these surgical aspects, you may have to manage, probably with ercp, or any other surgical interventions. Though coly systectomy is not routinely indicated. 

### conclude
So to conclude in whole about the liver disorders, it is not frequent in pregnancy. But if you encounter, it could be challenging to manage. Can have adverse outcomes both for the mother and the fetus. Of course, there could be a small risk even for the healthcare worker. Evaluation to be Depending on the symptoms and basic investigation findings. Early diagnosis term to treatment, intensive care management, multi disciplinary approach, good timing of delivery, liver team involvement in the management, if available, the outcome could be really optimized to the greatest extent. 






#
[^1]: Next Chapter is 

